src/docs/index.adoc, before:

= GR8 CRM - Campaign Management Plugin
Göran Ehrsson <goran@technipelago.se>
:description: Official documentation for the GR8 CRM Campaign Management Plugin
:keywords: groovy, grails, crm, gr8crm, documentation
:toc:
:numbered:
:icons: font
:imagesdir: ./images
:source-highlighter: prettify
:homepage: http://gr8crm.github.io
:gr8crm: GR8 CRM
:gr8source: https://github.com/technipelago/grails-crm-campaign
:license: This plugin is licensed with http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.html[Apache License version 2.0]

== Introduction

{gr8crm} is a set of http://www.grails.org/[Grails Web Application Framework]
plugins that makes it easy to develop web applications with CRM functionality.

You can find more information about {gr8crm} on the main documentation site {homepage}.

=== Customer Relationship Management

Customer relationship management (CRM) is a system for managing a company’s interactions with current and future customers.
It involves using technology to organize, automate and synchronize sales, marketing, customer service, and technical support.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Customer_relationship_management[Wikipedia]

The {gr8crm} "Ecosystem" currently contains over 40 Grails plugins. For a complete list of plugins see {homepage}.

Each {gr8crm} plugin defines a http://martinfowler.com/bliki/BoundedContext.html[Bounded Context]
that focus on one specific domain, for example *contact*, *project* or *document*.

== Campaign Management Plugin

This plugin provide storage and services for managing many types of campaigns  in {gr8crm} applications.

Note that this plugin does not contain any user interface components. This plugin contains domain classes and services only.
The plugin http://gr8crm.github.io/plugins/crm-campaign-ui/[crm-campaign-ui] provides a Twitter Bootstrap based user interface for managing campaigns.
`crm-campaign-ui` depends on `crm-campaign` so you only need to include `crm-campaign-ui`
in your BuildConfig.groovy if you want end-user campaign management features.

== Domain Model

image::campaign-domain.png[Campaign Domain Model]

=== CrmCampaign


== CrmCampaignService

Like most other {gr8crm} plugins this plugin have a main service with methods for creating, searching and updating campaigns.

=== Create a new campaign

`CrmCampaign createCampaign(Map params, boolean save = false)`

To create a new campaign you call the `createCampaign(Map, boolean)` method with a map of property values and a boolean
to indicate if the campaign should be persisted inside the method or if you want to persist it later yourself.

[source,groovy]
.CreateCampaign.groovy
----
def c = crmCampaignService.createCampaign(...);

println "Campaign $c created"
----

=== Banner Campaign

A banner campaign is used when you want to display a banner image on your web page with a link that leads to
a page with more information. A banner campaign uses {homepage}/plugins/crm-content[crm-content] plugin to store banner images.

[source,groovy]
.CreateBannerCampaigns.groovy
----
def grailsApplication
def bannerCampaign <1>

final ApplicationContext ctx = grailsApplication.mainContext

final CrmCampaign parentCampaign = crmCampaignService.createCampaign(number: "banner",
        name: "Banners on home page", description: "Parent campaign for all banners on home page",
        true) <2>

def createCampaign = { name, desc, img, link -> <3>
    def c = crmCampaignService.createCampaign(parent: parentCampaign,
            name: name, description: desc, code: "ads", true)
    if(c.hasErrors()) {
        throw new RuntimeException("Cannot create campaign")
    } else {
        def image = ctx.getResource(img).file <4>
        image.withInputStream { is ->
            crmCampaignService.addCampaignResource(c, is, "banner.jpg", image.length(), "image/jpeg")
        }
        bannerCampaign.configure(c) {
          url link <5>
        }
    }
}
// Create three campaigns, one for each of our new amazing products.
createCampaign "Product X", "Our amazing new Product X...",
        "images/banners/product-x.jpg", "http://mywebshop.com/view/product-x"
createCampaign "Product Y", "Our amazing new Product Y...",
        "images/banners/product-y.jpg", "http://mywebshop.com/view/product-y"
createCampaign "Product Z", "Our amazing new Product Z...",
        "images/banners/product-z.jpg", "http://mywebshop.com/view/product-z"
----
<1> Inject the BannerCampaign bean so we can use it to configure our campaigns.
<2> Create a parent campaign that group all banner campaigns.
<3> Create a closure to make it easy to create sub-campaigns.
<4> Banner images are located in web-app/images/banners so we can get them via ApplicationContext.
<5> Each sub-campaign is configured with the link to more information.

.Rendering banners

To display the three banners we created above we can call the `images` action in `CrmCampaignResourceController`
to get a list of images. In the following example we use Javascript and jQuery to add all images to a banner area
on our web page. When the visitor clicks on an image it will redirect the browser to the configured link.

[source,javascript]
----
$.getJSON("/crmCampaignResource/images?t=1&code=ads", function(data) { <1>
    var container = $("#banners");
    for(var i = 0; i < data.length; i++) {
        var banner = data[i];
        var $img = $("<img/>").attr("src", banner.uri).attr("alt", banner.title);
        var $link = $("<a/>").attr("href", banner.url).attr("target", '_blank')
                .attr("title", banner.title);
        $link.append($img);
        $container.append($link);
    }
});
----
<1> Because GR8 CRM is always multi-tenant we must specify in which tenant our campaigns are stored (t=1).

=== Information Campaign

If you develop a public facing site with GR8 CRM you can display different content depending on where your visitors
come from. For example if they come via a link on Twitter you can display one type of content, if they come via
Facebook you can display another type of content.

[source,groovy]
.CreateInformationCampaign
----
def twitter = crmCampaignService.createCampaign(number: "twitter-app-2016", code: "twitter",
    name: "Tweets", description: "Visitors that came to us via a tweet", true)
def text = """
<h3>Download our Twitter App</h3>
<div class="pull-right">
   <@link controller="download" action="index" query="id=twitter-app" class="btn btn-success">Download</@link>
</div>
<p>With our new Twitter app you can do amazing things...</p>
"""
crmCampaignService.addCampaignResource(twitter, text, "twitter-app.ftl", [contentType: "text/html")
----

With one or more campaigns (created above) we can use the `<crm:campaign>` GSP tag to render the text.

[source,groovy]
.Config.groovy
----
crm {
    campaign {
        landingParam = ['utm_source', 'campaign', '_c] <1>
        landingPages = [home: 'index'] <2>
        sessionParam = 'campaign' <3>
    }
}
----
<1> A list of known campaign source query parameters. This list is used to lookup the right campaign.
<2> The landing pages that will trigger campaign lookup, in this example it's HomeController.index.
<3> If a campaign is found a reference to it is stored in a HTTP session attribute called 'campaign'.

[source,html]
.home/index.gsp
----
<div class="well">
    <crm:campaign campaign="${request.session.campaign}" template="default-campaign.ftl"/> <1>
</div>
----
<1> If the session attribute 'campaign' is non-null the text for that campaign is rendered.
Otherwise a default text template is rendered using the 'crm-content' plugin.

=== Product Discount Campaign

If you develop a web shop with the `crm-product` plugin you can configure product campaigns to offer discounts or
value-add products for your customers. The `ProductDiscountCampaign` handler is very flexible with lots of
configuration options.

The following example applies 10 % discount on "Product X" products if the customer lands on our home page or web shop
and a campaign source query parameter has the value "twitter".

[source,groovy]
.Config.groovy
----
crm {
    campaign {
        landingParam = ['utm_source', 'campaign', '_c]
        landingPages = ['home|blog|webshop': 'index']
        sessionParam = 'campaign'
        productDiscountCampaign.round = true
    }
}
----

[source,groovy]
.CreateProductDiscountCampaign
----
def twitter = crmCampaignService.createCampaign(number: "twitter2016", code: "twitter",
    name: "Promotion for twitter users", description: "Follow us on Twitter to receive a 10 % discount on Product X.")
productDiscountCampaign.configure(twitter) {
    products = ['productXbasic', 'productXpro', 'productXultimate'] <1>
    discount = 0.10 <2>
    condition = 'any' <3>
}
campaign.save(failOnError: true)
----
<1> Only apply discount on a limited list of products.
<2> 10 % discount
<3> The discount is applied without any amount threshold.
If condition is a number the discount will only be applied if the total shopping cart value is higher than 'condition'.

See https://github.com/technipelago/grails-crm-campaign/blob/master/test/integration/grails/plugins/crm/campaign/ProductDiscountCampaignSpec.groovy[ProductDiscountCampaignSpec.groovy] for more examples.

=== Email Campaign

[source,groovy]
.CreateEmailCampaign.groovy
----
def emailCampaign <1>

def campaign = crmCampaignService.createCampaign(name: "Test campaign", true)
emailCampaign.configure(campaign) {
    subject = "Test"
    sender = "info@mycompany.com"
    parts = ['body']
    body = """<h1>Hello World!</h1>"""
} <2>
crmEmailCampaignService.createRecipients(campaign, ['me@mycompany.com', 'joe.average@customer.com']) <3>
crmEmailCampaignService.send() <4>
----
<1> Inject the EmailCampaign bean so we can use it to configure our campaign.
<2> Configure the email layout and other email parameters.
<3> Add two recipients.
<4> Start the campaign. This will send the email to the recipients.

==== Bounce Tracking (return-to-sender)

When you send out large amount of emails you must have a process to handle invalid email addresses and other type of
return-to-sender emails. The quartz job `CrmEmailBounceJob` helps you with that burden. It periodically scans the IMAP mailbox
that you used as `sender` or `reply-to` address. If it finds an error report from an external mail server
it looks up the recipient in your {gr8crm} database and marks it with *error* status.
Optionally it can tag the `CrmContact` instance with a tag that tells you that this contact's email address it not valid.
Future email campaign can ignore contacts tagged as invalid. Or you can query and delete them from your address database.

[source, groovy]
.Config.groovy
----
crm {
    campaign {
        job.bounce.enabled = true
        email {
            bounce {
                imap.host = 'imap.googlemail.com'
                imap.port = 993
                imap.username = 'info@yourcompany.com' <1>
                imap.password = 'password' <2>
                imap.store = 'imaps'
                to = 'newsletter@yourcompany.com' <3>
                tag = 'wrong-email' <4>
                tenant = 1 <5>
            }
        }
    }
}
----
<1> Your sender or reply-to address
<2> GMail users, generate an app specific password in Google Admin Console
<3> If the sender or reply-to address is an alias, specify the address here to filter messages on *To:*
<4> Contacts will be tagged with this value, exclude or set to null if you don't want to use tagging
<5> The tenant to process in a multi-teant environment

== Changes

2.4.2:: Better configurability for the email campaign bounce tracker
2.4.1:: First public release (2.4.0 got corrupted when published to grails.org)

== License

{license}

== Source Code

The source code for this plugin is available at {gr8source}

== Contributing

Please report {gr8source}/issues[issues or suggestions].

Want to improve the plugin: Fork the {gr8source}[repository] and send a pull request.

Commit message:

CrmCampaignRecipient and CrmContact are now linked correctly when sending emails

src/docs/index.adoc, after:

= GR8 CRM - Campaign Management Plugin
Göran Ehrsson <goran@technipelago.se>
:description: Official documentation for the GR8 CRM Campaign Management Plugin
:keywords: groovy, grails, crm, gr8crm, documentation
:toc:
:numbered:
:icons: font
:imagesdir: ./images
:source-highlighter: prettify
:homepage: http://gr8crm.github.io
:gr8crm: GR8 CRM
:gr8source: https://github.com/technipelago/grails-crm-campaign
:license: This plugin is licensed with http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.html[Apache License version 2.0]

== Introduction

{gr8crm} is a set of http://www.grails.org/[Grails Web Application Framework]
plugins that makes it easy to develop web applications with CRM functionality.

You can find more information about {gr8crm} on the main documentation site {homepage}.

=== Customer Relationship Management

Customer relationship management (CRM) is a system for managing a company’s interactions with current and future customers.
It involves using technology to organize, automate and synchronize sales, marketing, customer service, and technical support.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Customer_relationship_management[Wikipedia]

The {gr8crm} "Ecosystem" currently contains over 40 Grails plugins. For a complete list of plugins see {homepage}.

Each {gr8crm} plugin defines a http://martinfowler.com/bliki/BoundedContext.html[Bounded Context]
that focus on one specific domain, for example *contact*, *project* or *document*.

== Campaign Management Plugin

This plugin provide storage and services for managing many types of campaigns  in {gr8crm} applications.

Note that this plugin does not contain any user interface components. This plugin contains domain classes and services only.
The plugin http://gr8crm.github.io/plugins/crm-campaign-ui/[crm-campaign-ui] provides a Twitter Bootstrap based user interface for managing campaigns.
`crm-campaign-ui` depends on `crm-campaign` so you only need to include `crm-campaign-ui`
in your BuildConfig.groovy if you want end-user campaign management features.

== Domain Model

image::campaign-domain.png[Campaign Domain Model]

=== CrmCampaign


== CrmCampaignService

Like most other {gr8crm} plugins this plugin have a main service with methods for creating, searching and updating campaigns.

=== Create a new campaign

`CrmCampaign createCampaign(Map params, boolean save = false)`

To create a new campaign you call the `createCampaign(Map, boolean)` method with a map of property values and a boolean
to indicate if the campaign should be persisted inside the method or if you want to persist it later yourself.

[source,groovy]
.CreateCampaign.groovy
----
def c = crmCampaignService.createCampaign(...);

println "Campaign $c created"
----

=== Banner Campaign

A banner campaign is used when you want to display a banner image on your web page with a link that leads to
a page with more information. A banner campaign uses {homepage}/plugins/crm-content[crm-content] plugin to store banner images.

[source,groovy]
.CreateBannerCampaigns.groovy
----
def grailsApplication
def bannerCampaign <1>

final ApplicationContext ctx = grailsApplication.mainContext

final CrmCampaign parentCampaign = crmCampaignService.createCampaign(number: "banner",
        name: "Banners on home page", description: "Parent campaign for all banners on home page",
        true) <2>

def createCampaign = { name, desc, img, link -> <3>
    def c = crmCampaignService.createCampaign(parent: parentCampaign,
            name: name, description: desc, code: "ads", true)
    if(c.hasErrors()) {
        throw new RuntimeException("Cannot create campaign")
    } else {
        def image = ctx.getResource(img).file <4>
        image.withInputStream { is ->
            crmCampaignService.addCampaignResource(c, is, "banner.jpg", image.length(), "image/jpeg")
        }
        bannerCampaign.configure(c) {
          url link <5>
        }
    }
}
// Create three campaigns, one for each of our new amazing products.
createCampaign "Product X", "Our amazing new Product X...",
        "images/banners/product-x.jpg", "http://mywebshop.com/view/product-x"
createCampaign "Product Y", "Our amazing new Product Y...",
        "images/banners/product-y.jpg", "http://mywebshop.com/view/product-y"
createCampaign "Product Z", "Our amazing new Product Z...",
        "images/banners/product-z.jpg", "http://mywebshop.com/view/product-z"
----
<1> Inject the BannerCampaign bean so we can use it to configure our campaigns.
<2> Create a parent campaign that group all banner campaigns.
<3> Create a closure to make it easy to create sub-campaigns.
<4> Banner images are located in web-app/images/banners so we can get them via ApplicationContext.
<5> Each sub-campaign is configured with the link to more information.

.Rendering banners

To display the three banners we created above we can call the `images` action in `CrmCampaignResourceController`
to get a list of images. In the following example we use Javascript and jQuery to add all images to a banner area
on our web page. When the visitor clicks on an image it will redirect the browser to the configured link.

[source,javascript]
----
$.getJSON("/crmCampaignResource/images?t=1&code=ads", function(data) { <1>
    var container = $("#banners");
    for(var i = 0; i < data.length; i++) {
        var banner = data[i];
        var $img = $("<img/>").attr("src", banner.uri).attr("alt", banner.title);
        var $link = $("<a/>").attr("href", banner.url).attr("target", '_blank')
                .attr("title", banner.title);
        $link.append($img);
        $container.append($link);
    }
});
----
<1> Because GR8 CRM is always multi-tenant we must specify in which tenant our campaigns are stored (t=1).

=== Information Campaign

If you develop a public facing site with GR8 CRM you can display different content depending on where your visitors
come from. For example if they come via a link on Twitter you can display one type of content, if they come via
Facebook you can display another type of content.

[source,groovy]
.CreateInformationCampaign
----
def twitter = crmCampaignService.createCampaign(number: "twitter-app-2016", code: "twitter",
    name: "Tweets", description: "Visitors that came to us via a tweet", true)
def text = """
<h3>Download our Twitter App</h3>
<div class="pull-right">
   <@link controller="download" action="index" query="id=twitter-app" class="btn btn-success">Download</@link>
</div>
<p>With our new Twitter app you can do amazing things...</p>
"""
crmCampaignService.addCampaignResource(twitter, text, "twitter-app.ftl", [contentType: "text/html")
----

With one or more campaigns (created above) we can use the `<crm:campaign>` GSP tag to render the text.

[source,groovy]
.Config.groovy
----
crm {
    campaign {
        landingParam = ['utm_source', 'campaign', '_c] <1>
        landingPages = [home: 'index'] <2>
        sessionParam = 'campaign' <3>
    }
}
----
<1> A list of known campaign source query parameters. This list is used to lookup the right campaign.
<2> The landing pages that will trigger campaign lookup, in this example it's HomeController.index.
<3> If a campaign is found a reference to it is stored in a HTTP session attribute called 'campaign'.

[source,html]
.home/index.gsp
----
<div class="well">
    <crm:campaign campaign="${request.session.campaign}" template="default-campaign.ftl"/> <1>
</div>
----
<1> If the session attribute 'campaign' is non-null the text for that campaign is rendered.
Otherwise a default text template is rendered using the 'crm-content' plugin.

=== Product Discount Campaign

If you develop a web shop with the `crm-product` plugin you can configure product campaigns to offer discounts or
value-add products for your customers. The `ProductDiscountCampaign` handler is very flexible with lots of
configuration options.

The following example applies 10 % discount on "Product X" products if the customer lands on our home page or web shop
and a campaign source query parameter has the value "twitter".

[source,groovy]
.Config.groovy
----
crm {
    campaign {
        landingParam = ['utm_source', 'campaign', '_c]
        landingPages = ['home|blog|webshop': 'index']
        sessionParam = 'campaign'
        productDiscountCampaign.round = true
    }
}
----

[source,groovy]
.CreateProductDiscountCampaign
----
def twitter = crmCampaignService.createCampaign(number: "twitter2016", code: "twitter",
    name: "Promotion for twitter users", description: "Follow us on Twitter to receive a 10 % discount on Product X.")
productDiscountCampaign.configure(twitter) {
    products = ['productXbasic', 'productXpro', 'productXultimate'] <1>
    discount = 0.10 <2>
    condition = 'any' <3>
}
campaign.save(failOnError: true)
----
<1> Only apply discount on a limited list of products.
<2> 10 % discount
<3> The discount is applied without any amount threshold.
If condition is a number the discount will only be applied if the total shopping cart value is higher than 'condition'.

See https://github.com/technipelago/grails-crm-campaign/blob/master/test/integration/grails/plugins/crm/campaign/ProductDiscountCampaignSpec.groovy[ProductDiscountCampaignSpec.groovy] for more examples.

=== Email Campaign

[source,groovy]
.CreateEmailCampaign.groovy
----
def emailCampaign <1>

def campaign = crmCampaignService.createCampaign(name: "Test campaign", true)
emailCampaign.configure(campaign) {
    subject = "Test"
    sender = "info@mycompany.com"
    parts = ['body']
    body = """<h1>Hello World!</h1>"""
} <2>
crmEmailCampaignService.createRecipients(campaign, [[email: 'me@mycompany.com'], [email: 'joe.average@customer.com']]) <3>
crmEmailCampaignService.send() <4>
----
<1> Inject the EmailCampaign bean so we can use it to configure our campaign.
<2> Configure the email layout and other email parameters.
<3> Add two recipients.
<4> Start the campaign. This will send the email to the recipients.

==== Open tracking

If you want to know if a recipient has opened the email you can include an invisible "beacon" image that when
requested from the server notifies the campaign that the recipient has viewed the email. However this is not
100% accurate because most people today don't show images automatically in their email clients. They have to
manually force a download of remote content (images). But it can give you a hint about how successfull your campaign is.

To activate the tracking image add the following configuration parameter:

    crm.campaign.email.track = true

This adds a tracking image to all outbound emails and you can see the result in the *target group* tab on the campaign.

==== Bounce Tracking (return-to-sender)

When you send out large amount of emails you must have a process to handle invalid email addresses and other type of
return-to-sender emails. The quartz job `CrmEmailBounceJob` helps you with that burden. It periodically scans the IMAP mailbox
that you used as `sender` or `reply-to` address. If it finds an error report from an external mail server
it looks up the recipient in your {gr8crm} database and marks it with *error* status.
Optionally it can tag the `CrmContact` instance with a tag that tells you that this contact's email address it not valid.
Future email campaign can ignore contacts tagged as invalid. Or you can query and delete them from your address database.

[source, groovy]
.Config.groovy
----
crm {
    campaign {
        job.bounce.enabled = true
        email {
            bounce {
                imap.host = 'imap.googlemail.com'
                imap.port = 993
                imap.username = 'info@yourcompany.com' <1>
                imap.password = 'password' <2>
                imap.store = 'imaps'
                to = 'newsletter@yourcompany.com' <3>
                tag = 'wrong-email' <4>
                tenant = 1 <5>
            }
        }
    }
}
----
<1> Your sender or reply-to address
<2> GMail users, generate an app specific password in Google Admin Console
<3> If the sender or reply-to address is an alias, specify the address here to filter messages on *To:*
<4> Contacts will be tagged with this value, exclude or set to null if you don't want to use tagging
<5> The tenant to process in a multi-teant environment

== Changes

2.4.3:: Fixed bug that caused the link between recipient and contact to be missing when sending emails
2.4.2:: Better configurability for the email campaign bounce tracker
2.4.1:: First public release (2.4.0 got corrupted when published to grails.org)

== License

{license}

== Source Code

The source code for this plugin is available at {gr8source}

== Contributing

Please report {gr8source}/issues[issues or suggestions].

Want to improve the plugin: Fork the {gr8source}[repository] and send a pull request.
